KEP-168-2: Pending workloads visibility (#1300)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/168-2-pending-workloads-visibility/README.md

-->

<!-- toc -->
- [Summary](#summary)
- [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Cons of the current solution](#cons-of-the-current-solution)
  - [Goals](#goals)
  - [Non-Goals](#non-goals)
- [Proposal](#proposal)
  - [User Stories (Optional)](#user-stories-optional)
    - [Story 1](#story-1)
    - [Story 2](#story-2)
    - [Story 3](#story-3)
  <!-- - [Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)](#notesconstraintscaveats-optional) -->
  - [Risks and Mitigations](#risks-and-mitigations)
- [Design Details](#design-details)
  - [API Details](#api-details)
  - [URIs](#uris)
  - [API Objects](#api-objects)
  - [KueueManager changes](#kueuemanager-changes)
  - [Test Plan](#test-plan)
      - [Prerequisite testing updates](#prerequisite-testing-updates)
    - [Unit Tests](#unit-tests)
    - [Integration tests](#integration-tests)
    - [E2E tests](#e2e-tests)
  - [Graduation Criteria](#graduation-criteria)
- [Implementation History](#implementation-history)
- [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)
- [Alternatives](#alternatives)
  - [Alternative approaches](#alternative-approaches)
  - [Alternative within the proposal](#alternatives-within-the-proposal)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

> Introduce a new API that allows users to on-demand fetch information about pending workloads in both ClusterQueue and LocalQueue. Users will be able to look up the position of a specific workload in both queues and list all pending workloads in a specific queue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This KEP proposes to introduce a new API that allows users to on-demand fetch information about pending workloads in both ClusterQueue and LocalQueue. Users will be able to look up the position of a specific workload in both types of queues and list all pending workloads in a specific queue.
```

## Motivation

As presented in [KEP#168](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/168-pending-workloads-visibility),  there is currently a proposal for a mechanism that supports fetching the order of pending workloads, but it comes with a lot of cons. This proposal addresses all of those problems.

### Cons of the current solution

#### Size of the queue

There are a few scalability concerns. The first one is that the number of fetched pending workloads is limited by the etcd object's size limit. By default, a user is able to fetch only 10 workloads stored at the head of a queue. This number can be increased up to 4000, but comes with a performance loss.

#### Consistency across all LocalQueues

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with ```K``` LocalQueues, in some cases (e.g., inserting a high-priority workload), LocalQueuesManager has to send ```K``` requests to all LocalQueues to update their status. Not only does it block all other requests, but it also takes ```K/QPS``` seconds to make data consistent across all LocalQueues. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 
```
Just a suggestion, to make it easier to read.

Provided by the [LocalQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-localqueue) and the [Workload endpoint](#fetch-information-about-single-workload).

#### Story 2 

As an administrator of Kueue with ClusterQueue visibility, I would like to be able to check directly and compare the positions of pending workloads in the queue, no matter the size of it. It is important that data across all LocalQueue is consistent, and no two workloads have the same position in ClusterQueue. This will help me answer users' questions about their workloads.

Provided by the [ClusterQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-clusterqueue).

#### Story 3 

As a developer who uses Kueue, I would like to be able to monitor the state of my ClusterQueue/LocalQueue using dashboards. I need a mechanism that allows me to easily build it.

Provided by the [ClusterQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-clusterqueue) and the [LocalQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-localqueue).

### Risks and Mitigations

#### DDoS

> The only risk we foresee is that the server may be exposed to DDoS attacks. A potential attacker may flood the server with requests, which will result in constantly locking the Kueue Manager. To mitigate this risk, we plan to introduce throttling so that even with numerous requests, the Kueue Manager remains functional. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One risk we foresee is that the server may be exposed to DDoS attacks. A potential attacker may flood the server with requests, which will result in constantly locking the Kueue Manager. To mitigate this risk, we plan to introduce throttling so that even with numerous requests, the Kueue Manager remains functional. 
```
To avoid the need to change this section when another risk is reported :).

> The only risk we foresee is that the server may be exposed to DDoS attacks. A potential attacker may flood the server with requests, which will result in constantly locking the Kueue Manager. To mitigate this risk, we plan to introduce throttling so that even with numerous requests, the Kueue Manager remains functional. 

Reviewer: Maybe we can say that this risk is mitigated by the API server P&F mechanism which will queue the incoming requests if there are too many: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control/. Additionally, based on the user feedback, we may consider another caching mechanism inside kueue.

## Design Details

> The proposal introduces a new server running on the Kueue's pod. It computes the current state of KueueManager using its cache without any additional request overhead. The server uses the [K8s API Aggregation Layer](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/extend-kubernetes/api-extension/apiserver-aggregation/) mechanism. The same mechanism is used by the [metrics-server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server). It is an alternative to extending the Kueue's API with CRDs, meaning there will be no additional etcd objects or even the need to use existing ones. It reduces the number of necessary requests to provide consistency across all LocalQueues as discussed before. 

Reviewer: This sentence "It is an alternative to extending the Kueue's API with CRDs, meaning there will be no additional etcd objects or even the need to use existing ones. It reduces the number of necessary requests to provide consistency across all LocalQueues as discussed before. " sounds more like motivation. I don't think it is needed in this section.

Similarly to the ```metrics-server``` the server will be implemented with the [apiserver library](https://github.com/kubernetes/apiserver), which provides authentication and authorization.

### API Details

We introduce a new API that will extend the existing one.

There will be separate endpoints for administrators and regular users. Each endpoint exposes information about a pending workload, such as:
- workload's position in a ClusterQueue,
- workload's position in a LocalQueue,
- workload's priority,
- creation timestamp.

The API does not allow for the modification of any objects.

Regular users will have access only to the LocalQueues they are assigned to. However, they will be able to fetch information about the global position of a workload in a ClusterQueue, without any details about workloads in different LocalQueues. 

Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQuees the workloads are assigned to. 

> ### URIs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### API endpoints:
```

We introduce a new API group ```pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates the following endpoints:

#### List all pending workloads in ClusterQueue

```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME
```

#### List all pending workloads in LocalQueue
```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME
```

#### Fetch information about single Workload
```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/workloads/WL_NAME
```

### API Objects:

```
// User-facing representation of a PendingWorkload in both LocalQueues and ClusterQueue that summarizes neccessary information from the admission order perspective
type PendingWorkloadSummary struct {
	TypeMeta TypeMeta
	ObjectMeta ObjectMeta

	LocalQueueNamestring
	PositionInClusterQueue int32
	PositionInLocalQueue int32
	Priority int32
}

type PendingWorkloadsSummaryList struct {
	TypeMeta TypeMeta
	ListMeta ListMeta

	Items []PendingWorkloadSummaryInClusterQueue
}
```

### KueueManager changes

> We propose changing KueueManager's cache, so it contains more information about pending workloads. This allows us to expose that information. We'll need cache:

Reviewer: Maybe this is not needed at this point. For example instead of using the cache structure the queue manager could implement `ComputeQueueHead(queueName, maxCount) []*workload.Info`, bypassing the cache. Still, it might be desirable to reuse the cache, but maybe we can defer this for later, based on user / review feedback.

- workload's priority,
- workload's LocalQueue name,
- workload's creation timestamp,
- relevant metadata.

Workload's position in a ClusterQueue and a LocalQueue will be computed on request.

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

#### Overview

Our main focus is integration tests, as most of the added code is responsible for integrating with the Kueue and RBAC roles.

#### Unit Tests

We plan on adding unit tests that cover getting a list of pending workloads at the KueueManager level.

- `pkg/visibility`: `30 Oct 2023` - `0%`

#### Integration tests

The integration tests should check if:
- Pending workloads are returned according to their actual status without delay. This includes adding and removing/admitting new workloads with various priorities,
- Adding workloads to one LocalQueues results in position changes for workloads submitted to other LocalQueues,

> - Data is consistent across all LocalQueues

Reviewer: Maybe this can be checked as part of the previous point.

- User with only LocalQueue visibility can view only appropriate LocalQueues

> 

Reviewer: - User with only LocalQueue visibility cannot access the list of pending workloads for ClusterQueue

#### E2E tests

We plan on adding sanity e2e tests.

### Graduation Criteria

First iteration (0.6):
- Release the new API in alpha. This allows us to adjust the API according to users' and reviewers' feedback.

Second iteration (0.7):
- Release the API in beta and guarantee backwards compatibility,

> - Improve the throttling mechanism if needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reconsider to introduce a throttling mechanism based on user and review feedback,
```
Suggestion for clarity. Maybe also reference the risk section here.

> #### Throttling

Reviewer: I think this is enough to mention just in the risks section.

#### Consistency across all LocalQueues

Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

#### Expanding API in the future

Moreover, there are some functional issues with the current approach. It does not expose any information about pending workloads but for ```name```, ```namespace```, and position in a queue (by listing workloads in order). Adding new fields would result in a decrease in the potential maximum number of fetched pending workloads, caused by the etcd object's size.

#### Delay

Additionally, in the previous proposal, Kueue updated the most prioritized workloads every 5 seconds. It is configurable, but since computing the most prioritized workloads can be expensive, it cannot be significantly reduced. Users can experience delays, which might not be convenient.

### Goals

> - Support listing in order all pending workloads in a ClusterQueue, no matter the size of the queue, and without delay,

Reviewer 2: Will the implementation consider the ability to support paged queries? I think this is still pretty important, especially with a lot of workloads.

Author: Since the K8s Aggregation Layer does not support pagination out of the box, we don't want to commit to it since it would require significant effort. However, it can be implemented on the client side. We also expose the endpoint to fetch information about a single workload, so there is a way to query its position without listing all the remaining pending workloads.

I've updated the non-goals and API Details sections to cover this.

Reviewer 3: Let's clarify what we mean by pagination.
Let's say I want to list 1000 elements now, and I can only see 100 at a time. Do you keep the 1000 elements somewhere in memory, with some key id, and allow users to query that list in 100 increments? In other words, you get a consistent view if you use the same id?

I don't think we need that. Simply listing elements from position X to Y, at this time, is enough.

Can we do something simple like having 2 query parameters for the API:
- first position
- number of elements (and this is some sane value by default: probably around 1000?)

Doing it in the client side (let's say a dashboard) could be wasteful.

Reviewer: We don't know at the moment how to have extra query parameters, so went for the simple proposal without pagination at all. In the prototype we implement it here: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/5bbb00f8c05ed02a84c11419e6af676222aaf787/pkg/visibility/api/pending_workload_CQ.go#L80-L91. However, at this layer we don't already have access to `http.Request` to see the query parameters. It might be possible, but it is not obvious how to get them. AFAIK metrics server also does not do pagination, so we don't have a good example of passing the query parameters.

Reviewer 2: > Can we do something simple like having 2 query parameters for the API:

> first position
> number of elements (and this is some sane value by default: probably around 1000?)

> Doing it in the client side (let's say a dashboard) could be wasteful.

I also think it's better to support on the server side or not support. On the client side is not a good choice.

Reviewer 3: Cross linking: The Pod log subresource implements query parameters https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/029452198566a41bc39d04a1ec5bad3f37621a1c/pkg/registry/core/pod/rest/log.go#L78

It's a different interface.

Author: Indeed, implementing a different interface allows us to pass query parameters. Hence, following @alculquicondor proposal, we will enable users to fetch pending workloads from position X to Y.

Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQuees the workloads are assigned to. 

### API endpoints:

We introduce a new API group ```pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates the following endpoints:

#### List all pending workloads in ClusterQueue

```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME
```

#### List all pending workloads in LocalQueue
```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME
```

#### Fetch information about single Workload
```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/workloads/WL_NAME
```

### API Objects:

```
// User-facing representation of a PendingWorkload in both LocalQueues and ClusterQueue that summarizes neccessary information from the admission order perspective
type PendingWorkloadSummary struct {
	TypeMeta TypeMeta
	ObjectMeta ObjectMeta

> 	LocalQueueNamestring

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	LocalQueueName string
```

## Motivation

As presented in [KEP#168](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/168-pending-workloads-visibility),  there is currently a proposal for a mechanism that supports fetching the order of pending workloads, but it comes with a lot of cons. This proposal addresses all of those problems.

### Cons of the current solution

#### Size of the queue

There are a few scalability concerns. The first one is that the number of fetched pending workloads is limited by the etcd object's size limit. By default, a user is able to fetch only 10 workloads stored at the head of a queue. This number can be increased up to 4000, but comes with a performance loss.

#### Consistency across all LocalQueues

Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

#### Expanding API in the future

> Moreover, there are some functional issues with the current approach. It does not expose any information about pending workloads but for ```name```, ```namespace```, and position in a queue (by listing workloads in order). Adding new fields would result in a decrease in the potential maximum number of fetched pending workloads, caused by the etcd object's size.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Moreover, there are some functional issues with the current approach. It does not expose any information about pending workloads except for ```name```, ```namespace```, and position in a queue (by listing workloads in order). Adding new fields would result in a decrease in the potential maximum number of fetched pending workloads, caused by the etcd object's size.
```

#### Delay

> Additionally, in the previous proposal, Kueue updated the most prioritized workloads every 5 seconds. It is configurable, but since computing the most prioritized workloads can be expensive, it cannot be significantly reduced. Users can experience delays, which might not be convenient.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Additionally, in the previous proposal, Kueue updated the most prioritized workloads every 5 seconds. It is configurable, but since computing the most prioritized workloads can be expensive, it cannot be significantly reduced.
Users can observe outdated information, which might not be convenient.
```

### Goals

- Support listing in order all pending workloads in a ClusterQueue, no matter the size of the queue, and without delay,
- Support listing in order all pending workloads in a LocalQueue, no matter the size of the queue, and without delay,
- Support fetching information about a specific workload, no matter its position in the queue, and without delay,
- Provide consitent data across all the LocalQueues without hitting `QPS`.

### Non-Goals

- Provide ETA for a workload,
- Provide information on whether a workload is admissible,
- Provide information about the requested resource for a workload,
- Support pagination.

## Proposal

> - Add new API,

Reviewer: The last point does not seem important enough to mention in this section. 

Also, I would suggest to formulate to capture the main technical aspects of the proposal, without going too much detail like in the "Design Details" section (or something along the lines):

"Add a new Extension API server to expose on-demand endpoints for fetching information about pending workloads."

Then, it may also be worth adding something like:
"The returned information about pending workloads includes all the necessary information relevant for their position in the queue, along with the position itself. There are three such endpoints: (1) to list the pending workloads in ClusterQueue, (2) list the pending workloads in LocalQueue, and (3) get a specific pending workload."

- Add a new Extension API Server,
- Modify existing KueueManager's cache to support fetching additional information about pending workloads.

### User Stories

#### Story 1 

> As a user of Kueue with LocalQueue visibility only, I would like to know the position in the ClusterQueue of a workload that I've just submitted, no matter how big the queue is. Knowing the position and assuming stable velocity in the ClusterQueue, would allow me to estimate the arrival time of my workload.

Reviewer: This is the starting point. If you can estimate that, on average, the ClusterQueue admits 10jobs per hour, and your workload's position is 5, you can estimate it gets admitted after around 30min. This is a rough estimate, but it is similar to what we have when waiting for a hotline service. 

I think this KEP exposes the information about pending workloads, being a replacement for https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/991, but supports a larger scale. Later, we can enrich the returned pending workloads with additional information.

Later. we could have a more sophisticated approach to compute the workload admission time. Another potential approach is to estimate execution time for each job of a given type, based on historical data. Then, a user can estimate the admission time by summing the runtime estimations for all jobs in front of the given job. I suggest there could a new KEP for this which we can prioritize independently.

Similarly to the ```metrics-server``` the server will be implemented with the [apiserver library](https://github.com/kubernetes/apiserver), which provides authentication and authorization.

All computation will be done on-demand without additional reconcile loops.

The server provides that:
- Pending workloads are returned according to their actual status without significant delay. This includes adding and removing/admitting new workloads with various priorities,
- Adding workloads to one LocalQueues results in position changes for workloads submitted to other LocalQueues,
- Data is consistent across all LocalQueues,
- User with only LocalQueue visibility cannot access the list of pending workloads for ClusterQueue.

### API Details

We introduce a new API that will extend the existing one.

> There will be separate endpoints for administrators and regular users. Each endpoint exposes information about a pending workload, such as:

Reviewer 3: that this mean that there will be 2 endpoints for clusterqueue, 2 for localqueue, etc?

Reviewer: IIUC there is only one endpoint for ClusterQueue, and one for LocalQueue. These translate in an implied way into endpoints for admins and users, but this may depend on RBAC. We may rephrase this sentence to clarify.
For example: "There will be separate endpoints exposing the information about pending workloads for LocalQueues, and ClusterQueues". Or something along the lines.

Author: Clarified

- workload's position in a ClusterQueue,
- workload's position in a LocalQueue,
- workload's priority,
- creation timestamp.

The API does not allow for the modification of any objects.

Regular users will have access only to the LocalQueues they are assigned to. However, they will be able to fetch information about the global position of a workload in a ClusterQueue, without any details about workloads in different LocalQueues. 

> Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQuees the workloads are assigned to.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQueues the workloads are assigned to.
```

Since the K8s Aggregation Layer does not support pagination out of the box, we don't want to commit to it, since it would require significant effort. However, it can be implemented on the client side. We also expose [the endpoint to fetch information about a single workload](#fetch-information-about-a-single-workload), so there is a way to query its position without listing all the remaining pending workloads.

### API endpoints:

> We introduce a new API group ```pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates the following endpoints:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We introduce a new API group ```visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates the following endpoints:
```

Reviewer: Given the technical limitation of the framework, I think we can have either of this paths:
1. `GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME`
2. `GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME`` (pending workloads implied)
3. `GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/pending_workloads_in_cluster_queue/CQ_NAME``

Having `pending-workloads` as a group (option 1.) may seem too specific, but all of them work for me.

#### List all pending workloads in ClusterQueue

```

> GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME

Reviewer 3: would something like this be possible?

```suggestion
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME/pending_workloads
```

Reviewer: We tried like this, but there seems to be a limitation of the framework, that the path can only have one fragment. The fragment is the key in this map in the prototype: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/5bbb00f8c05ed02a84c11419e6af676222aaf787/pkg/visibility/api/install.go#L45-L47

Reviewer 3: It seems that `/` is treated specially.
We do this for pods https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/029452198566a41bc39d04a1ec5bad3f37621a1c/pkg/registry/core/rest/storage_core.go#L231

Author: Thanks for pointing  that out @alculquicondor. Indeed, it's possible to introduce that kind of subresource so I'll change the KEP

```

#### List all pending workloads in LocalQueue
```
GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME
```

#### Fetch information about a single Workload
```

> GET /apis/pending-workloads.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/workloads/WL_NAME

Reviewer 3: What if the workload is admitted or finished? would you see some information?

Reviewer: Not at the moment. However, for admitted or finished workloads users don't need extra information that is dynamically changing, such as position in the queue.

Author: I've clarified that this endpoint refers to a single pending workload

  - [Alternatives within the proposal](#alternatives-within-the-proposal)
    - [apiserver-builder library](#apiserver-builder-library)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP proposes to introduce a new API that allows users to on-demand fetch information about pending workloads in both ClusterQueue and LocalQueue. Users will be able to look up the position of a specific workload in both types of queues and list all pending workloads in a specific queue.

## Motivation

As presented in [KEP#168](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/168-pending-workloads-visibility),  there is currently a proposal for a mechanism that supports fetching the order of pending workloads, but it comes with a lot of cons. This proposal addresses all of those problems.

### Cons of the current solution

#### Size of the queue

There are a few scalability concerns. The first one is that the number of fetched pending workloads is limited by the etcd object's size limit. By default, a user is able to fetch only 10 workloads stored at the head of a queue. This number can be increased up to 4000, but comes with a performance loss.

#### Consistency across all LocalQueues

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

Author: Can you please elaborate on that? In the old approach of keeping the list of pending workloads inside of LocalQueue's status we still need to send a number of requests to update positions in all of the LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, for which the workload was admitted.

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

Reviewer 5: > In the old approach of keeping the list of pending workloads inside of LocalQueue's status we still need to send a number of requests to update positions in all of the LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, for which the workload was admitted.

Yes, that's right.
IIRC, we had discussions about the concerns in the following thread:

https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/991#discussion_r1284352679

At that time, we thought we could avoid the concerns using a separate client.

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

Reviewer 3: Yes, a separate client to do LocalQueue updates could be an approach, but I think the API extensions is overall more flexible.

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. 

Reviewer 5: > Yes, a separate client to do LocalQueue updates could be an approach, but I think the API extensions is overall more flexible.

Yes, that's right. I also think that we should introduce this API extension. I wanted to say that mentioning `separate client` would be worth it here.

Maybe, we can say like "Although we can use a client separate from a default one, this way can not completely resolve scalability".

#### Expanding API in the future

Moreover, there are some functional issues with the current approach. It does not expose any information about pending workloads except for ```name```, ```namespace```, and position in a queue (by listing workloads in order). Adding new fields would result in a decrease in the potential maximum number of fetched pending workloads, caused by the etcd object's size.

#### Delay

Additionally, in the previous proposal, Kueue updated the most prioritized workloads every 5 seconds. It is configurable, but since computing the most prioritized workloads can be expensive, it cannot be significantly reduced.
Users can observe outdated information, which might not be convenient.

### Goals

- Support listing pending workloads on positions from X to Y in a ClusterQueue, no matter the size of the queue, and without delay,
- Support listing pending workloads on positions from X to Y in a LocalQueue, no matter the size of the queue, and without delay,
- Support fetching information about a specific pending workload, no matter its position in the queue, and without delay,
- Provide consitent data across all the LocalQueues without hitting `QPS`.

### Non-Goals

> - Provide ETA for a workload,

Author: Yes, I've added clarification to that

- Provide information on whether a workload is admissible,
- Provide information about the requested resource for a workload,
- Support pagination with a consistent view of a specific state using a key id.

## Proposal

> - Add new API exposing information about pending workloads relevant for their position in the queue, along with the position itself. There are three such endpoints: (1) to list the pending workloads in ClusterQueue, (2) list the pending workloads in LocalQueue, and (3) get a specific pending workload."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add new API exposing information about pending workloads relevant for their position in the queue, along with the position itself. There are three such endpoints: (1) to list the pending workloads in ClusterQueue, (2) list the pending workloads in LocalQueue, and (3) get a specific pending workload.
```

> - Add a new Extension API server to expose on-demand endpoints for fetching information about pending workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new Extension API server to expose on-demand endpoints for fetching information about pending workloads.
```

Provided by the [LocalQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-localqueue) and the [Workload endpoint](#fetch-information-about-a-single-pending-workload).

#### Story 2 

As an administrator of Kueue with ClusterQueue visibility, I would like to be able to check directly and compare the positions of pending workloads in the queue, no matter the size of it. It is important that data across all LocalQueue is consistent, and no two workloads have the same position in ClusterQueue. This will help me answer users' questions about their workloads.

Provided by the [ClusterQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-clusterqueue).

#### Story 3 

As a developer who uses Kueue, I would like to be able to monitor the state of my ClusterQueue/LocalQueue using dashboards. I need a mechanism that allows me to easily build it.

Provided by the [ClusterQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-clusterqueue) and the [LocalQueue endpoint](#list-all-pending-workloads-in-localqueue).

### Risks and Mitigations

#### DDoS

> One risk we foresee is that the server may be exposed to DDoS attacks. A potential attacker may flood the server with requests, which will result in constantly locking the Kueue Manager. To mitigate this risk, we plan on relying on throttling, so that even with numerous requests, the Kueue Manager remains functional. The first approach we propose is to use [API server P&F mechanism](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control/). Additionally, based on the user feedback, we may consider another caching mechanism inside Kueue.

Author: It's definitely worth considering, but I would focus on that in the next release. I'll add it to the graduation criteria section.

> One risk we foresee is that the server may be exposed to DDoS attacks. A potential attacker may flood the server with requests, which will result in constantly locking the Kueue Manager. To mitigate this risk, we plan on relying on throttling, so that even with numerous requests, the Kueue Manager remains functional. The first approach we propose is to use [API server P&F mechanism](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control/). Additionally, based on the user feedback, we may consider another caching mechanism inside Kueue.

Reviewer 5: SGTM

#### Payload size

> Another risk we took into account is that the payload size would be too large in the case of 100k pending workloads. However, in the worst case scenario (which we foresee as a rather unrealistic one, since it would mean all string fields would be filled with 256 chars) its size is about 1,4kB. Even with 100k pending workloads, it takes 140 MB, which is still a reasonable number compared to `metrics-server's` payloads. Hence, we believe it should not be a concern.

Author: This proposal supports pagination using query parameters. I've added a sentence clarifying it.

> Another risk we took into account is that the payload size would be too large in the case of 100k pending workloads. However, in the worst case scenario (which we foresee as a rather unrealistic one, since it would mean all string fields would be filled with 256 chars) its size is about 1,4kB. Even with 100k pending workloads, it takes 140 MB, which is still a reasonable number compared to `metrics-server's` payloads. Hence, we believe it should not be a concern.

Reviewer 5: Ah, that's right. We can provide the pagination mechanism using `offset` and `limit`.
Thanks.

- User with only LocalQueue visibility cannot access the list of pending workloads for ClusterQueue.

### API Details

We introduce a new API that will extend the existing one.

There will be separate endpoints exposing the information about pending workloads for LocalQueues, and ClusterQueues. Each endpoint exposes information about a pending workload, such as:
- workload's position in a ClusterQueue,
- workload's position in a LocalQueue,
- workload's priority,
- creation timestamp.

The API does not allow for the modification of any objects.

Regular users will have access only to the LocalQueues they are assigned to. However, they will be able to fetch information about the global position of a workload in a ClusterQueue, without any details about workloads in different LocalQueues. 

Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQueues the workloads are assigned to.

The API also allows user to fetch information about part of the Cluster/LocalQueue from position X to Y. There are two query parameters to do so:
- `offset` indicates position of the first fetched workload - default: `0`

> - `limit` indicates max number of workloads to be fetched - default: `1000`

Author: We don't have hard, experimental data, but we believe the most computationally heavy operation is obtaining a read lock on Kueue and copying the heap, which are independent of the limit parameter. Hence, we believe limiting this query parameter won't have a significant impact on DDoS attacks

> - `limit` indicates max number of workloads to be fetched - default: `1000`

Reviewer 5: That sounds reasonable. If we find unexpected issues, we can set limitations on these query parameters, later.

> Since the K8s Aggregation Layer does not support pagination out of the box, we do not want to commit to it since it would require significant effort. However, it can be implemented on the client side. We also provided above-mentioned query parameters that can help in cases where one does not want to fetch the whole Cluster/LocalQueue. Additionally, we expose [the endpoint to fetch information about a single pending workload](#fetch-information-about-a-single-pending-workload), so there is a way to query its position without listing all the remaining pending workloads.

Reviewer: Update it, since we actually now figured out how to support pagination server side :)

> ### API endpoints:

Reviewer 5: How can we access these endpoints? IIUC, we can not access these via the kubectl command.
Do you have any plans to provide client libraries/commands?

Author: Good question. Actually, it is possible to access these via the kubectl command using `--raw` flag and passing the URI. I'll clarify that.

Author: There is also an ongoing effort to create [Kueue CLI](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1325). We aim to provide similar behaviour to metrics server with `kubectl top` command

Reviewer 5: > Good question. Actually, it is possible to access these via the kubectl command using --raw flag and passing the URI. I'll clarify that.

Oh, it's great to see. Thanks for clarifying.

> There is also an ongoing effort to create https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/1325. We aim to provide similar behaviour to metrics server with kubectl top command

I'm wondering if we should provide CRUD golang libraries (probably, it's ok with only READ) so that external systems could call these endpoints.

Also, we can implement the Kueue CLI using the golang library.

Author: We'll provide a client generated with `k8s.io/code-generator` similarly to the core Kueue API. I'll mention that in the KEP

Reviewer 5: Oh, it sounds good. 
Thanks for the clarifications. Because I'm unfamiliar with API aggregation, your response would always be helpful to me.

We introduce a new API group ```visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates following endpoints: 

#### List all pending workloads in ClusterQueue

```
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME/pending_workloads?offset=0&limit=1000
```

#### List all pending workloads in LocalQueue
```
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME/pending_workloads?offset=0&limit=1000
```

#### Fetch information about a single pending Workload
```
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/pending_workload/WL_NAME
```

### API Objects:

```
// PendingWorkloadSummary is a user-facing representation of a pending workload in both LocalQueues and ClusterQueue that summarizes neccessary information from the admission order perspective

> type PendingWorkloadSummary struct {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
type PendingWorkload struct {
```

	TypeMeta TypeMeta
	ObjectMeta ObjectMeta

	LocalQueueName string
	PositionInClusterQueue int32

> 	PositionInLocalQueue int32

Reviewer 3: Can we actually get this information? Otherwise, I wouldn't prioritize it.

Reviewer: We don't have it at hand, but the computation is rather cheap - when we iterate over the snapshoted data for cluster queue, we increment position counters per local queue. Still, I agree it does not seem like a priority. I think we can do this later if needed for dashboards.

	Priority int32
}

// PendingWorkloadSummaryList contains a list of pending workloads in the context
// of the query (within LocalQueue or ClusterQueue).

> type PendingWorkloadsSummaryList struct {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
type PendingWorkloadsSummary struct {
```

```
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME/admitted_workloads?offset=0&limit=1000
```

### Test Plan

[X] I/we understand the owners of the involved components may require updates to
existing tests to make this code solid enough prior to committing the changes necessary
to implement this enhancement.

#### Overview

Our main focus is integration tests, as most of the added code is responsible for integrating with the Kueue and RBAC roles.

#### Unit Tests

We plan on adding unit tests that cover getting a list of pending workloads at the KueueManager level.

- `pkg/visibility`: `30 Oct 2023` - `0%`

#### Integration tests

Integration tests should check if our server work correctly according to the assumptions we mentioned:
- Pending workloads are returned according to their actual status without delay.
- Adding workloads to one LocalQueues results in position changes for workloads submitted to other LocalQueues,
- Data is consistent across all LocalQueues
- User with only LocalQueue visibility cannot access the list of pending workloads for ClusterQueue

#### E2E tests

> We plan on adding sanity e2e tests.

Reviewer: Add that we also want to use e2e tests for RBAC. You may list some of the critical scenarios:
- clusters queues can only be accessed by admin users
- local queues can be accessed by only users with the visibility to the corresponding namespaces

### Graduation Criteria

First iteration (0.6):
- Release the new API in alpha. This allows us to adjust the API according to users' and reviewers' feedback.

Second iteration (0.7):
- Release the API in beta and guarantee backwards compatibility,
- Reconsider to introduce a throttling mechanism based on user and review feedback,

> 

Reviewer 5: Can we add the criteria for the stable (GA)?

Author: Good point, I've added it

  - [Alternatives within the proposal](#alternatives-within-the-proposal)
    - [apiserver-builder library](#apiserver-builder-library)
<!-- /toc -->

## Summary

This KEP proposes to introduce a new API that allows users to on-demand fetch information about pending workloads in both ClusterQueue and LocalQueue. Users will be able to look up the position of a specific workload in both types of queues and list pending workloads in a specific queue.

## Motivation

As presented in [KEP#168](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/tree/main/keps/168-pending-workloads-visibility), there is currently a proposal for a mechanism that supports fetching the order of pending workloads, but it comes with a lot of cons. This proposal addresses all of those problems.

### Cons of the current solution

#### Size of the queue

There are a few scalability concerns. The first one is that the number of fetched pending workloads is limited by the etcd object's size limit. By default, a user is able to fetch only 10 workloads stored at the head of a queue. This number can be increased up to 4000, but comes with a performance loss.

#### Consistency across all LocalQueues

> Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. Although we can use a client separate from a default one, it would not not completely resolve all scalability issues

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another scalability drawback is that in a Kueue setup with a lot of LocalQueues it is very likely to hit the Kueue QPS. Assuming Kueue setup with multiple LocalQueues pointing to the same ClusterQueue, Kueue needs to send updates to all LocalQueues to update their status, in order to keep the workload positional information up-to-date. This consumes `QPS` which can lead to blocking other requests. Although we can use a client separate from a default one, it would not not completely resolve all scalability issues.
```
nit

- workload's position in a ClusterQueue,
- workload's position in a LocalQueue,
- workload's priority,
- creation timestamp.

The API does not allow for the modification of any objects.

Regular users will have access only to the LocalQueues they are assigned to. However, they will be able to fetch information about the global position of a workload in a ClusterQueue, without any details about workloads in different LocalQueues. 

Administrators will have access to all the data at the ClusterQueue level. They will be able to view all the workloads, no matter the LocalQueues the workloads are assigned to.

The API also allows user to fetch information about part of the Cluster/LocalQueue from position X to Y. There are two query parameters to do so:
- `offset` indicates position of the first fetched workload - default: `0`
- `limit` indicates max number of workloads to be fetched - default: `1000`

Thanks to these parameters our server also support pagination.

### API endpoints:

We introduce a new API group ```visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io``` that aggregates following endpoints: 

#### List all pending workloads in ClusterQueue

```

> GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME/pending_workloads?offset=0&limit=1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/clusterqueues/CQ_NAME/pendingworkloads?offset=0&limit=1000
```
To synchronize with the decision made on the PR.

```

#### List all pending workloads in LocalQueue
```

> GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME/pending_workloads?offset=0&limit=1000

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/LQ_NAMESPACE/localqueues/LQ_NAME/pendingworkloads?offset=0&limit=1000
```

```

#### Fetch information about a single pending Workload
```

> GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/pending_workloads/WL_NAME

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET /apis/visibility.kueue.x-k8s.io/VERSION/namespaces/WL_NAMESPACE/pendingworkloads/WL_NAME
```

```

Those endpoints can be accessed using `kubectl get --raw <ENDPOINT_PATH>` command.

Another way to access API is to use a client generated with `k8s.io/code-generator`, similarly to the core Kueue API.

### API Objects:

```
// PendingWorkload is a user-facing representation of a pending workload in both LocalQueues and ClusterQueue that summarizes neccessary information from the admission order perspective
type PendingWorkload struct {
	TypeMeta TypeMeta
	ObjectMeta ObjectMeta

	LocalQueueName string
	PositionInClusterQueue int32
	PositionInLocalQueue int32
	Priority int32
}

// PendingWorkloadSummary contains a list of pending workloads in the context
// of the query (within LocalQueue or ClusterQueue).

> type PendingWorkloadSummary struct {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type PendingWorkloadsSummary struct {
```

Reviewer: nit

// PendingWorkloadSummaryList contains a list of pending workloads in the context
// of the query (within LocalQueue or ClusterQueue).

> type PendingWorkloadsSummary struct {

Author: I think it's a better idea to change it into `PendingWorkloadList` so it's similar to what we already have in Kueue:
https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/blob/cf25c71bef51fa6d0880432352dd92da6f3a8ea6/apis/kueue/v1beta1/workload_types.go#L293

Reviewer: I'm fine with `PendingWorkloadsSummary` and `PendingWorkloadList`, slightly leaning towards `PendingWorkloadList` as the `List` sufix seems like a convention.

Reviewer 3: It is a convention for list endpoints. This is not a list endpoint.

Reviewer: Makes sense, let's go with `PendingWorkloadsSummary` for the Get endpoint.

Author: Thanks for the clarification.
